Editorial review: Document the Observable API (#39237)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/api/observable_api/using/index.md

---
title: Using the Observable API
slug: Web/API/Observable_API/Using
page-type: guide
---

{{DefaultAPISidebar("Observable API")}}

> The [Observable API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Payment_Request_API) The **Observable API** ("observables") provides a mechanism for handling an asynchronous stream of events in an efficient, ergonomic fashion. This guide provides an introduction to using the fundamental features of observables.

Reviewer: Wrong link.

Author: Ooops, yes. Fixed.

## Creating an observable

> The use of observables centers around {{domxref("Observable")}} objects, which represent a stream of events that can be observed and manipulated. The two main ways to create an `Observable` instance are as follows:

Reviewer: "The use of observables centers around {{domxref("Observable")}} objects" This reads really weird to me. How about we delete the whole first sentence and get right to the point.

Author: Heh, yes, that is waffly, flowery prose. On both pages, I've updated it to

> `Observable` objects (commonly called **observables**) represent a stream of events that can be observed and manipulated. The two main ways to create an observable are as follows:

To keep the important parts but make it sound direct.

- The {{domxref("EventTarget.when()")}} method, which returns an {{domxref("Observable")}} object instance representing a stream of events that will be fired on the `EventTarget`.
- The {{domxref("Observable.Observable", "Observable()")}} constructor, which returns an {{domxref("Observable")}} object instance representing a custom stream of events that can be subscribed to as needed.

> We will first look at the `EventTarget.when()` method, as that is the most common use case for observable; we will look `Observable()` constructor examples too, later on in the article.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will first look at the `EventTarget.when()` method, as that is the most common way to user observables; we will look at the `Observable()` constructor later on in this article when discussing custom observables.
```

> `Observable` instances have several methods that return a reference to the same `Observable`, and these methods can be chained together to create a pipeline.

Reviewer: Sentences like this I think read better as "Observables have several methods" instead of "`Observable` instances"`.

> `Observable` instances have several methods that return a reference to the same `Observable`, and these methods can be chained together to create a pipeline.

Reviewer: Again, they do not return the same Observable.

Let's study an example to explore what this looks like.

## Basic `when()` example

Here we'll print the updated mouse coordinates to the screen whenever the mouse is moved over the top of a couple of {{htmlelement("div")}} elements. We won't show the HTML because it just includes the `<div>` elements plus a single {{htmlelement("p")}} element to display the data.

```html hidden live-sample___basic-when-example live-sample___basic-takeuntil-example
<div></div>
<div></div>
<p></p>
```

In the example CSS, we give the `<div>` elements a {{cssxref("height")}}, {{cssxref("background-color")}}, and {{cssxref("margin-bottom")}}:

```css live-sample___basic-when-example live-sample___basic-takeuntil-example
div {
  height: 150px;
  background-color: purple;
  margin-bottom: 10px;
}
```

The JavaScript looks like this:

```js live-sample___basic-when-example
const outputElem = document.querySelector("p");

document.body
  .when("mousemove")
  .filter((e) => e.target.matches("div"))
  .map((e) => ({ x: e.clientX, y: e.clientY }))
  .subscribe({ next: reportCoords });
```

> In this snippet we first grab a reference to the `<p>` element, then specify the [`mousemove`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/mousemove_event) event inside the `when()` method on the page's {{htmlelement("body")}} element, which returns a `Observable` object representing a stream of `mousedown` events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this snippet we first grab a reference to the `<p>` element, then specify the [`mousemove`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/mousemove_event) event inside the `when()` method on the page's {{htmlelement("body")}} element, which returns a `Observable` object representing a stream of `mousedown` events fired on the `<body>` element.
```

```js
const outputElem = document.querySelector("p");

document.body
  .when("mousemove")
  .filter((e) => e.target.matches("div"))
  .map((e) => ({ x: e.clientX, y: e.clientY }))
  // When the click event fires, unsubscribe
  .takeUntil(document.body.when("click"))
  .subscribe((p) => {
    outputElem.textContent = `${p.x},${p.y}`;
  });
```

The `takeUntil()` method [converts](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Observable/from) the input to an observable, so you can even pass a promise to unsubscribe when the promise resolves.

The `AbortController` method is more flexible where your unsubscribe condition is not easily represented as a single control flow object. It also allows you to unsubscribe observers independently if the observable has multiple observers. The `takeUntil()` method, on the other hand, essentially converts the observable pipeline into one that completes, and when an observable completes, all observers are unsubscribed.

## Creating custom observables

> Now we've looked at the _usage_ side of observables, we turn to the _creation_ side. Like Promises, observables are created with a callback. The callback's job is to do work and push data to its subscribers. This callback isn't called immediately: it's called each time it's subscribed to, either by `subscribe()`, by one of the [aggregation methods](#aggregating_values), or by subscribing to a downstream observable created by a [transformation method](#transforming_an_observable). It receives a {{domxref("Subscriber")}} object. You can call methods on this object to dispatch data to all observers subscribed to the observable.

Reviewer 2: As of right now, the callback is only called when the first subscriber subscribes to the Observable. Subsequent subscribers will share the underlying subscription until it completes, errors, or everyone unsubscribes. After that the callback will be called again on the next subscriber. It's "ref-counted".

There is some debate about this behavior currently.

const list = document.getElementById("list");
const outputPara = document.getElementById("output-para");
```

Next, we create an observable on the submit `<button>` by calling {{domxref("EventTarget.when", "when()")}} on it, passing `"click"` as an argument. We then {{domxref("Observable.subscribe", "subscribe()")}} to this observable, passing a reference to the `addItemToList()` function. This means that `addItemToList()` is called whenever the submit `<button>` is clicked:

```js live-sample___list-example
itemEntryBtn.when("click").subscribe(addItemToList);
```

The `addItemToList()` function first checks whether the text `<input>` is empty — if so, we `return` out of the function. We don't want to add empty list items. If it is not empty, we add an {{htmlelement("li")}} element as a child of our `<ul>` element using {{domxref("Element.innerHTML", "innerHTML")}}, which contains the input value plus a "Remove" `<button>`.

Finally, we empty the input value and {{domxref("HTMLElement.focus", "focus()")}} it, ready to enter the next list item.

```js live-sample___list-example
function addItemToList() {
  if (!itemEntryInput.value) {
    return;
  }

>   const listItem = `<li>${itemEntryInput.value} <button>Remove</button></li>`;

Reviewer 2: There's an html injection opportunity here. :)
